Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Elizabeth Pilsner. She is
Professor of Anthropology at California State University. Fullerton her
research questions include patterns of mate preferences, mate choice,
sexuality, gender, romantic love and reproduction. And today we're
going to talk about the Shuar uh which is
basically a group of hunter horticultural people in South
America, uh partner choice and marital practices, parent offspring,
conflict made preferences, parental investment, coupling, women, sexual strategies
and some other related topics. So, Doctor Pills. Wor
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thank you for inviting me. I'm really
happy to be here.
So tell us about the shoar who, who are
these people. And uh I mean, tell us a
little bit about their society generally.
Sure. Well, first, one of the things that you
should know is that they are one of many
indigenous nationalities in South America and particularly in Ecuador.
The Shuar uh live both in Ecuador and in
Peru. They are in Ecuador, the second largest indigenous
nation. So there's approximately 100 and 10,000 by some
estimates. So are people living today um across three
different provinces in Ecuador? And as I said on
into Peru, um They have uh a so when
we say that they are hunter horticulturalists. So first
of all, for your viewers who may not know
those terms, um horticulture, so we, we can talk
about subsistence strategies um that differ in terms of
how much we're relying on resources that occur naturally
in the environment and how much we're producing resources.
So hunter gatherers get all of their resources from
resources that are occurring naturally in the environment that
are not cultivating plants as a general rule. They
are not domesticating animals or keeping animals. Um Hunter
horticulturalists specific uh uh rely on hunting primarily for
protein sources. Um And horticulture means that they are
not just gathering, although they do a lot of
gathering in the rainforest, but they are also cultivating
plants. So the women maintain gardens. Their primary crops
are uh manio sweet manioc, not bitter manio, which
requires a lot more processing um plantain, uh and
AAA variety of other plants that they grow through
planting, through propagating through even sharing. They have vast
networks of uh um sharing networks of the props
that they use for their, their plants for by
one of my colleagues, Doctor Brenda Bowser. Um So
they, there's a very strong interdependence between men and
women. Um IN terms of uh resource acquisition, in
terms of subsistence, uh the family organization. One of
the things that you should know about the Shaar
also is that they really have a very recent
history of acculturation as recently as the 19 fifties
and 19 sixties. Prior to that, um the Schwar
didn't live in settled communities really at all. They
lived in independent households throughout the rainforest. Um And
they uh had alliances amongst these individual households, generally
individual men. Um And so these alliances could be
due to kinship or uh uh reciprocal relationships. Um
And the households typically were composed of AAA man
with his wife or wives. Um And I'll get
back to that in just a second. Um And
their Children and possibly uh a New son-in-law um
or two might be around. Um So in terms
of numbers of wives, if we look at the
earlier ethnography of the Schwar, we look at uh
historical accounts from Schwar community members themselves in the
very recent past, again, a as recently as in
the 19 fifties and sixties. And really up until
um nearly the 21st century, the Schwar could be
characterized as most men had 2 to 3 wives.
Um So this is an interesting figure, right? Because
if we expect that on average populations have relatively
equal numbers of males and females, if we have
a majority of males having 2 to 3 wives,
that means mathematically, we have a lot more women
than we do men approximately 2 to 3 times
as many women as we do men. Um And
the reason for this was that in uh historic
shore communities, there's a really high rate of inter
individual and intergroup violence, very high rate of homicide,
one of the highest homicide rates on the planet
even today, although fortunately, it's reduced substantially. Um But
that is the, the traditional context, as I said,
this really didn't start to change very much at
all until about the 19 fifties and sixties. At
which time the show started to, uh, concentrate into
cros into communities, um, which could range in size
from just a couple of households to up to
several 100 individuals. Um Although those larger sizes really
more recently, um And this was in part, in
order to provide, um, themselves with political protection, um,
and the ability to, uh, interact with the, um,
Ecuadorian government. Um And so that's the context in
which the Shuar have been living for the past,
um, half century plus, I lose track of the
dates. I think it's still like 1988 or something.
And so, uh, so now they live primarily in,
in Centros. Um, THEY still practice to some extent
polygamy, but the rates of polygamy are declining substantially.
Um And, uh, but they still primarily subsist with
hunting and horticulture. Women still produce the bulk of
the food that people eat every day. Hunting is
becoming scarcer and harder to really sustain. So we
see a lot more wage labor. Um, WHETHER that's
through contract labor or through salaried positions. Um A
lot of men in the villages where I work
in the communities where I work um are actually
employed as teachers. Um AND a growing number of
women as well. Um And that's a uh a
government paid job. So it's a very reliable income.
Um And, and so we're seeing these kinds of
economic changes which then also changes the ways that
people contribute to the household. Um But we'll get
into that probably more further down.
Sure. Sure. Uh So, yeah, le let's try to
keep some of the aspects that you mentioned there
in mind when exploring some specific aspects of their
society. But uh OK, so among all of that,
what are the aspects of their society, their sociality
that you've studied the most or focus the most
on?
Yeah. So my primary area of study is related
to reproductive and mating strategies. So that includes uh
uh studying the both the traditional and the current
um marriage norms and behavior, sexual norms and behavior
and parenting norms and behavior. Um I have done
quite a bit of uh research on mate preferences
and in fact, I'll a little bit later, I'll
tell you about the follow up study. I'm doing
uh working on um getting, gosh, it's now like
20 year follow up data on people I interviewed
when they were unmarried. Um As part of my
dissertation research. Um So that's it, it's gonna be
really cool because looking at how their mate preferences
actually played out, uh I'm, I have uh recently
been focusing on parent offspring, conflict and mating decisions
as well as women's uh mating and reproductive strategies.
What are the choices that, that they're making? What
are the strategies that they're utilizing? Um AND also
reproductive behavior in general. So in terms of things
like the utilization of birth control or other forms
of traditional family planning, um the nursing behaviors, weaning
behaviors, and pregnancy and childbirth, um norms and behaviors.
So those are, those are the main things that,
that I've been studying other things that, that I
don't have much sys or any systematic data on.
But I pay a lot of attention to while
doing field work because I'm really deeply interested in
them are issues related to the sexual division of
labor, gender norms, um perceptions of sexuality in particular,
in terms of uh perceptions of uh sexuality diversity
um including LGBT Q plus issues and women's lives
in general. Um All the things that women do
and the struggles and challenges and, and, and powers
that they have all of those things um and
cultural change. So those are some of the things
that I pay attention to but haven't really collected
any data on. Mhm uh
So we're going to get more into that later
on. But uh I, I mean, just for a
brief question about all of what you said there
when it comes to the gender norms specifically, uh
with the economic changes that you described there, have
you seen uh any, I mean, important uh differences
over time in terms of how gender norms might
have changed?
Yeah. So, I mean, I don't know that I
would even go so far as to say gender
norms have changed. But certainly in terms of, for
example, I think that the idea of what makes
men, men and what makes women women um is
still pretty similar to what people have described to
me from the past. Um AND what I've read
from the past, um but what's changed is in
particular, what's expected in terms of rights for women,
what women can are allowed to do are, are,
are, are, are, what's the word I'm looking for
um are owed essentially as humans, right? Not as
anything, it some special category, but just that, that,
that, you know, this idea of women's rights really
has changed. So if we look at, you know,
schwar traditional practices, um they're very, it, it, it,
it's, it's an, it was an extremely patriarchal society.
Um MEN absolutely dominated in terms of both with
physical domination, right? So beating of women was common,
men absolutely controlled women with force and Children as
well. Um And women weren't, did not have any
explicitly or very little I should say explicitly recognized
influence. Now, of course, as women do in all
places and in all times this is not to
say that women were passive or that they had
no power or influence it. One of the things
that I have written about a little bit is
women's uh the, the sources of resistance that are
available to women as well as the areas in
which they are able to exert influence in which
they're able to shape the society uh as, as
well. It's just that those things are much more
under uh uh uh what's what I'm, what, how
am I trying to say that? Um MUCH less
explicit, much less um publicly recognized um undercover a
little bit. Um So that has, has changed quite
a bit, right. The there has been a, a
substantial increase in education for everybody across the board,
but particularly for girls and women. So of the
women approximately my age. So I'm 50 ish my
age in the shore communities, most of them have
about a third grade education. Um And a lot
of them my age are a little bit older
are illiterate. Um However, if you look at women
just a little bit younger than me. So we're
looking at women in their forties, in their thirties,
we're seeing gradual increases in the amount of education
to, at that, to, at this point, most girls
are staying in school through the completion of high
school. Um And many are going on to college.
Um So that has been a huge change again,
that's been in some ways across the board. So
boys have also been doing more schooling. Um BUT
the effect is much more dramatic in terms of
girls and this has very, very huge impacts on
how their lives unfold. So again, when we're talking
about, and I, and I reference my own age
because this is, again, it's just to me, it's
so significant how recent this history is that again,
women, my age, almost all of them were married
by the age of 12 without having had any
say in that marriage without having any expectation of
it. There. You know, the story that's told to
me again and again is I was out, you
know, doing playing or doing whatever, working in the
garden, my parents called me and said, you're gonna
marry this guy. And what? Um AND so that's
so recently. So that's, that's all the women my
age. Um But now the girls are mostly at
least finishing high school. So that's pushing back that
age of marriage a little bit. Surprisingly, the actual
age of marriage hasn't changed. Average age of marriage
hasn't changed that much in my sample over the
years. But in part, that's because there's some outliers
at both ends. So amongst the older women, there's
my sample sizes are so small right in my,
the community where I've collected the most data where
I collected complete uh uh marital and pregnancy histories
of, of all the women in that community that
sample size was, uh, let me look. I think
I had, hold on a second. I'll tell you
exactly. 20. Um, NO, it was 30 in, in
total 30 married women and one unmarried woman. So
that's, you know, that's my sample size. So I
have of the older cohort, most of them are
getting married, as I said at around 12 or
13. But then there's one woman who got married,
didn't get married really at all until she was
in her late into her, into her twenties. So
she was fully adulthood at that point. Um And
that pulls that average up and then amongst my
younger cohort, you know, the average age is closer
to 17 or 18. Um But there's a few
who ran off and got married at 13. Um
So when you look at the average, it doesn't
look like there's been that much change, but there,
there really has if you're looking at the uh
the median um changes pretty significantly.
So we'll come back to gender roles later in
our conversation, but just to follow perhaps a sort
of a script here. So starting with uh partner
choices and mari marital practices. So, uh how do
partner choices work in? Sure society, I mean, who
uh chooses there, who does the choices? Uh And
uh I mean, how does marriage look like? Of
course, you mentioned earlier that uh at least until
recently, historically speaking, most marriages were polygamous, polygynous specifically,
right? So but uh uh we can get into
how that changed over time, but tell us first
about partner choice.
Yeah. So again, I always have to, whenever I'm
describing anything in terms of our relationship practices, I
do have to sort of make this comment, I
talk about traditionally, which was pretty recently and today,
so traditionally, partner choice was almost entirely a negotiation
between men. Um What would typically happen is, so,
remember I said that people mostly were living in
independent households, not in communities and a man would
come of age, which when I say of age
would have been about 1516, 17 ish. Uh And
he would go out in search of a potential
wives. Um And if in he, you know, and
he very well might have information from kin or
other people he knows. Um But he also might
literally have just gone out searching um if he
finds a AAA girl, and again, traditionally, girls might
have been married off very in childhood. Um They
were not expected to engage in any sexual behavior
at the before the onset of Menzies anyway. Um
But they might be married off at childhood even
in infancy. Again, in terms of uh uh because
these relationships were negotiated between men and they were
these alliances between men. Sometimes the father would promise
his future daughters even so some girls would be
married even before they were born. Um And uh
and so basically, so the young man would be
out looking for potential brides. If he found one
that he, he thought was appropriate, he would approach
her father. Um And it was so traditionally, also,
the Schwar had a very um uh ritualized form
of greeting and meeting when you approached another man's
house, um that's referred to as strong talking where
the men would partially threaten one another, partially uh
give their genealogy to, you know, to situate their
relatedness or, or their, their network connections. Um And
this was then when it was concluded, it, well,
the indication that was concluded is in the, the
man of the house would call to his wife
to bring Chica. Um So sorry, I'm giving another
side. Um Chica is manio beer. I will come
back to it later, but for now, just say
it's very important to show our cultural practices. Um
And women are in charge of making chica and
having chica, but men control to whom it's given.
And when, um traditionally, so, uh the son, the,
the potential son-in-law would make his case to the
potential father-in-law. He would go hunting, bring some game
back. Now, there are descriptions in the earlier ethnography
um that the daughter herself would basically signal her
acceptance of this young man when she would cook
the food and bring it to him. Um, IN
my experience in my interviews with women, um I
do not get the sense that they had much
room for choosing not to serve the man food.
Um, AND in fact, I, I have many stories
of women and their conflicts with their parents of
either them running away and their parents retrieving them,
um, or them refusing and their parents forcing them.
Um, AGAIN of the women in my sample where
I have these full marital histories. Um, ONLY one
of those who had an, whose, whose parents chose
her, her, her partner, only one of them said
she actually came to agree to it before they
were married. Um So I don't know, um how
much leeway girls had in the past, but I
would bet not a whole lot. Um Again, girls
and their mothers might have had some influence if
they had strong uh uh reasons against this person.
Um But in the end, fathers basically made the
decision. So
let me just ask you one question because you're
already uh mentioning how much power uh the parents
of the women have over their partner choices. But
what about the parents of the men? Did they
also play a role there or not?
No, no, not at all. No, no, no. This
is entirely a negotiation between a potential son in
law and a potential father in law. And this
was very much about them forming an alliance. So
again, there were very high rates of intra and
intergroup warfare. Um So having allies was really important.
Now, man might be able to also get another
ally via his son in law. So it could
be that, you know, if he, if he gets
his son in law and maybe his son-in-law, his
potential son-in-law's dad is very powerful and then he
has sort of an ally through that. But the
parents of the sons really didn't have much to
do with this. Um Except to the extent that
again, that might be part of those negotiations. So
let's say for example, that the um a young
man comes looking for a, a wife. Um IF
he has sisters and I have as the dad,
I have sons, right? That might be part of
the negotiation that, you know, I'll give you my
daughter, but you need to give me one of
your sisters for one of my sons. Um So
to that extent, uh they might have some influence
in it, but generally other than that, no real
decision making.
Ok. Uh And, but when it comes to marriage,
since at the very beginning, you mentioned that uh
most marriages were polygynous, I mean, between a man
and two or three women. Uh I mean, I
was trying to understand because of course, uh it
seems that status also played a role in sure
society, right? I mean, the status of the particular
man who is making uh a marriage offer to
the father of the woman they uh he, he
wants to marry. Uh So, uh I mean, how,
how does that work? Exactly? Because if, if most,
I'm not sure what percentage we're talking about here.
But if you say that most marriages were between
one man and two or three women. Uh I
mean, uh how low in the social ranking, let's
say, would people, would the father of the uh
the woman be willing to go when uh accepting
uh an offer? Because I, I mean, it couldn't
be that like, I don't know, for example. Yeah,
I, I'm just putting a number out there. 70%
of men were uh high ranking,
right? So it, it, I don't think you, you
can really think of it in terms of this
hierarchical ranking. Um BECAUSE again, they were organized into
a community. So it's really about individual warrior. Um
And so there's very little, well, you know, again,
knowing that somebody has a powerful shaman as a
father or a powerful warrior as a father is
important information, but it's not like there's inherited status
rankings. Um And being the son of a, of
a formidable warrior doesn't necessarily mean you'll be a
formidable warrior and your status will be based on
your warrior. Um And that's really where this w
what's determining status is, you know, really, we can
think about it almost very directly as a warrior
ship um to use John Patton's uh terms for,
you know, how he worked in a neighboring population.
Um So not the Schwar but the Achuar um
who actually the two, these two na nationalities were
very much warring with one another as well. So
they both, both of them experienced intra group warfare,
but also between these two groups, particularly very high
rates of warfare. Um And so, yeah, so status
was really very much about one's prowess, um, in
terms of, of warriors and this was displayed by,
you know, one of the, uh features that the
Schwar have been well known for is that they
are the ones who, who made shrunken heads santa.
Um And that was really how a man could.
Well, here are the ways that he could indicate
his status, the number of salsa, he had the
number of wives he had and the amount of
chica he had. Um THOSE were, those are the
big ones. Um There were other many other things
as well, but those, those were the really big
status markers.
So you've already mentioned Chi twice. So what is
that?
So, Chica Chico is incredibly important. It is, as
I said, it's, it's, it's actually manio beer. So
it's uh a fermented drink made with this sweet
manioc root. Um And it is the core both
food beverage and social uh context. So, you know,
it's really created all the social contexts. So Chica
is really, it's really complicated i in talking about
it's simple to describe, it's, it's, you know, it's
fermented maniac beer, which is made by Mashing. I
have made Chica several times. Mashing the manioc um
chewing the uh the hard uh roots of the,
that's the sort of vein of the manioc chewing
that spitting that back in stirring it all together.
Um Mashing chewing, spitting, mashing chewing, spitting all that.
Um And then you let it ferment. Um AND
it can be, it can range dramatically in alcohol
content. There's very sort of everyday weak chica and
there's much stronger chica for parties or for guests.
Um Children drink chica Chica is, I mean, traditionally
that was the staple food. Um And I was,
when I talked to my friends in short communities
whose only experience with beer is this very sort
of watered down Pilsner, that's the National Beer of
Ecuador. And I tell them that beer is my
people's chica. And I tell them the history and
I'm like, no really in Northern Europe beer in
the, you know, in, in, in the middle ages,
beer was food. It was how you saved your
grains. And this is the same thing. It's, you
know, that's the way that they can keep that,
that uh those, those roots um and keep them
from rotting. Um So it, it, it serves very
much the same. And then as I said, it's
also because it's incredibly labor intensive to produce. So
first, there's, and all of the, all of the
labor that goes into making chica, all of it
is women's work with the one exception of clearing
the gardens originally. So again, we're in primary rainforest
here. Men usually clear out the garden. Um But
women plant the yuca, they harvest the yuca, which
is quite difficult to pull these big tuber roots
up out of the ground. They transport the yuca
in jungin. These are baskets that are, you know,
like £50 of yuca root in them that they
carry on their heads. Um Not on their heads
with a strap around their head, on their back.
Um Washing that, then they have to boil it,
they peeling it, peeling. It is a whole activity
in and of itself. Um And the show women
take, they have their machetes and they're just like
peeling and, you know, I almost cut my hand
off several times. Um I am not very competent
at this. Um And then, you know, the boiling
it, the mashing and the chewing and, and this
takes all afternoon to do um just the, the
making of the che itself, not the, you know,
harvesting and et cetera, et cetera. So it's incredibly
time and labor intensive. Um And it's all women's
labor, which is why Chica is such a good
indicator of a man's status, right? So men's status
relies on chica, the more chica he has the
better the chica is, the quicker women are able
to bring the chica out. Um You know, it,
the fact that he has enough on hand that
he doesn't run out. Um All of that is
a measure of his status So, it's, it's really
interesting how much, you know, this, this thing that's
entirely produced by women is this massive component of
men's status,
by the way, does it taste good? How does
it, how does it compare to other common alcoholic
beverages in, in the west? For example.
Well, it's quite a bit chunkier as a general
rule. So it is, it's thick and it's, you
know, it's usually got quite a lot of fibers
in it. Although usually when women serve it, they,
they wring out the fibers so it'll be mostly
liquidy, but it can be still quite, quite thick
and fairly fibrous. Um It is, it's kind of
sour. Um I admit that the first couple times
I tried it, I didn't like it that much.
Um But now I actually, it's like I crave
it and I get so I, when I go
back to Ecuador and I'm like, can I have
some chica in it? The chica? It's so good.
Um And then, you know that we've been doing
so a lot of people recently have been starting
to look at gut microbiomes because, you know, I
mentioned that the chewing and um and so this
is some work that my uh sadly, recently departed
colleague, John Patton was doing and other people are
doing it in other places as well, but he
was looking at how the um the gut microbiomes
uh of, of individuals in, in this case, Achuar
and uh Quechua communities, um how that was affected
by basically chica consumption. It turns out that it's
really good for, you know, basically sharing these gut
microflora that are really helpful. Um So anyway, but
I love it. I think it's, I think it's
really good and there's hot, there's a very wide
range of um of styles and quality. Um, A
study that I have been wanting to do for
a long time is essentially a blind taste test.
Um BECAUSE everybody is very open about the fact
that there's different qualities of chica and everybody knows,
you know, this woman makes really good chica and
this woman makes a not so great chica. Um
BUT there's not very good consensus on what qualities
would predict which women would make good chica. And
from an evolutionary perspective, we have a couple of
competing hypotheses, right? It could be that men are
picking up on um chemical cues of fecundity and
fertility, right? So that we would expect that the
chica that's produced by younger women with more reproductive
potential ahead of them would be preferred. However, there's
also pretty good argument that practice and experience actually
make for better chica. So there's also a prediction
that actually men would probably, or everybody on average
might prefer the chica of older women. And then
there's, you know, mh C predictions, maybe men prefer
the chica of women who are more distantly related
to them. And women maybe prefer the chica of
women who are more closely related to them. So,
there's all sorts of predictions that we could test.
Um And I'm dying to do this. Uh And
one of these days I'll get around to it,
by
the way, can you find uh Chi anywhere out
outside of Ecuador?
Yes. So, Chica is widely produced throughout South America,
but it differs really dramatically in different places and
it's, it's made both by highland uh populations and
lowland populations. Um AND with different kinds of core
ingredients. So in some places, it's made with um
uh mice and other places, it's made with uh
oh my gosh, all sorts of things. Bitter manioc
in Brazil, I think. But that requires a whole
different process. Um CORN. Uh And then even in,
in, in Schwar communities, they have multiple different kinds
of chica and some of them are really special
for special occasions. So there's chica de Chata which
is made with the Chanta Palm. Um That is
a very special occasion chica. Um I'll make chica
with uh uh Maduros which are uh uh basically
bananas, but the plantains that are have become yellow
and sweet. Um And uh yeah, so there's all
sorts of different kinds of chica. Um BUT short
chicas, primarily sweet maniac. So
OK, so to get back on track, uh
I get very excited about.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No. And it's, it seems
interesting to me. I mean, I'm not much of
a, I'm not much of a person who likes
alcohol. But, yeah, if, if it tastes good. Yeah,
I, I, I'm there, I'm there. So, uh, um,
about parent of spring conflict because earlier when we
were talking about partner choice. O of course, in
the case of men, that's one of the reasons
why I asked you if the parents of the
men also played the role there. You said they
don't really, so that doesn't matter really there. But
when it comes to the women, there are, of
course, some women as we should expect that do
not like their father's choices. And so how does
parent offspring conflict play out there?
Yeah. So this is my, my really big interest
currently as I'm very interested in the, the idea
of parent offspring conflict. Um And where the really
interesting research questions are. So, you know, the first
thing is that, well, the very first thing that
I want to, to say is that parent, parental
choice, parents being involved at all in offspring mating
decisions is a derived trait. It's a really human
trait. We don't see it basically in, in any
other animal that I can that I know of
where any third party has any sort of vested
interest in somebody else's mating decisions. So to that
extent, you know, we need to think about this
as very much related to the human mating context.
Um AND the, the really specific challenges of the
human mating context. So in in terms of the
parent offspring conflict. Uh YOU know, the general concept,
this goes right back to, you know, Trevor's parental
parental conflict paper, which has to do with the
fact that of course, Children should want as much
of their parents investment in resources as they can
possibly get because it's related to their own reproductive
success. And parents of course, should be trying to
distribute their investment and resources across their offspring in
order to get the most reproductive uh benefit to
themselves. Because of this, we also should expect that
if we're talking about preferences for a mate, for
an offspring that on average parents and offspring are
going to have a pretty large overlap in their
interests. It's not massive conflict of interest because the
daughters maximizing her own reproductive potential. This should on
the whole benefit the parent reproductive success as well.
Now, of course, there's a bunch of caveats to
that um that make it not work out so
nicely. Um So first of all, there's not complete
overlap. Daughters, fitness is only a small piece of
parents overall fitness. Um And the relative weight to
their fitness of her reproductive success is going to
depend on a whole bunch of factors, including things
like how many offspring they have. Is she the
only one that their entire fitness is resting on
or is she one of 10? Um That's gonna
make a difference, the relative impact, the relative influence
on the parents own fitness of their individual children's
reproductive success compared to the direct benefits that they
could potentially get from these mating decisions is gonna
also affect how big that that gap, that conflict
of interest is. Um And there's a whole bunch
of ways that parents should be interested in the
mating choices of their offspring that aren't directly related
to the potential reproductive success of their offspring. But
instead are related to some of the things that
we've already talked about alliance uh opportunities. Um So
the alliance value of a potential son-in-law is going
to be really, really important to um a father's
direct fitness, whereas it might have very little impact
on the daughter's reproductive success. Um I mentioned mating
opportunities. So again, there might be uh through these
alliances and we see this cross culturally in all
sorts of places, especially where we see arranged marriages,
part of what parents are max, part of what
parents are maximizing is those social benefits, the network
um benefits mating opportunities for their other Children. Uh
And um and e enhancing kinship ties. Um Other
factors that will affect this would be things like
the parents, particularly the dad's age. So, is he
still reproductively competitive or is he now just trying
to get the reproductive benefits from his Children if
he's still reproductively competitive? Which again, because men can
reproduce throughout their lifetimes, he probably is he can
also gain direct benefits by arranging his daughter's marriage.
And and getting potentially other mates for himself or
his Children. And of course, the resources that um
mates of offspring can bring to the, the the
parents or the the siblings of that um that
offspring that's going to partner up. Now, all of
those costs and benefits differ from one context to
the other. And this is part of why we
see such really different effects of parental influence on
offspring mate choice and different patterns of parental influence.
Um So in the Schwar context, we expect in
the traditional context, this probably would have been, you
know, near the extreme end of conflicts of interest
um because there were between, particularly between fathers and
daughters. So again, this is a really gendered argument
because we're not seeing the same thing at all
on the side of men's mating choices, right? So
this is really about the conflict of interest between
fathers and daughters. And there's several factors that make
it, make it make it more beneficial to fathers
to prioritize their own interests over their daughters. One
of those is that there's extreme reproductive skew. Um
Meaning that again, because of this general polygamy, um
if most men had two or three wives, that
means that most men had 2 to 3 times
the reproductive success of any individual woman. Um Now,
usually these things even out because again, the average
number of offspring for men should be the same
as the average number of offspring for women since
there's, each child has one off, one parent, uh
one parent of each sex, but we're missing a
lot of men. So we have, you know, this
idea that you, your sons really are either going
to have like three times the reproductive value of
your daughters or they're gonna be dead. Right? Is
really from the parental perspective what you're looking at.
Um But that means that, you know, you're not
thinking as much about the daughter's reproductive success. It's,
it's about, you know, how can I get the,
these direct benefits to myself or my sons? Um,
THERE'S also a, as I just mentioned that what
led to that is there is a highly discrepant
sex ratio. So there's far more women than there
are men. So again, we should expect that dad's
interests are going to be dramatically at odds with
daughters. Um, IN terms of what they're going to
be prioritizing. Um If uh if fathers could gain
allies or mates for themselves or their sons, those
bene benefits likely would have outweighed what really would
have been sort of marginal cost, possibly, possibly dramatic
cost, but probably more marginal costs, uh, or detriments
to daughters, fitness, certainly to her happiness, right. If
she's being married off to somebody that she doesn't
care about, she doesn't have a connection with, she's
not gonna be terribly happy. And here I have
to take another side note to talk about the
relationship between happiness and fitness. Um, BECAUSE of course,
we know that natural selection, it's not necessarily maximizing
happiness, it's maximizing reproductive fitness. But those things aren't
totally orthogonal, right? Happiness. What, what is happiness? Happiness
is often influenced by the presence of a cooper
cooper or supportive others feeling safe, secure, freedom from
fear or hardship. Right? So all of those things
are likely to actually have very measurable real benefits
to reproductive success too. So, well, it's true that
happiness isn't what you know, leads to fitness. It
does, you know, it, it's important and if we
have, you know, daughters or women in general, who
are just, you know, miserable and, and being treated
as travel, um that does have an impact on
their own reproductive success. But in this context, the
impact on their reproductive success of that is likely
to be much smaller than the impact on their
dad's fitness of being able to get these alliances
and these um network ties. In addition, as I
said, this was traditionally an extremely patriarchal society. Um
So there's a, a again, strong conflict of interest
between um the fathers and daughters in that the
daughters weren't really expected to have any autonomy, any
say. Um AGAIN, as I said before, as in
all societies, women, e even though women were, were
definitely subordinated, right? They were, they were regularly beaten,
they were treated as property and they were basically
wholly at the command of their husband. But as
in all societies, shore women also also both had
both the means of resistance and also ways of
influencing their society. And some of the things that
really affected that their ability to resist um are,
are things like, for example, in Amazonian horticultural societies,
women have a really a great deal of physical
autonomy. They're spending their days in the gardens which
the garden is not, you know, like a little
plot right outside your house. It's usually uh 5
to 5 minutes to an hour long walk through
the rainforest to a place that's, you know, again,
just cleared out of the rain forest. So they're
pretty much on their own um out and about
um women have vast ecological knowledge and skills. They
have strength and endurance, they have large kin and
social networks. So, one of their strategies of resistance
is their ability to run their ability to leave
bad partners, bad parents even now, that's limited because
they can't live indefinitely on their own. As you
said, there's really, you know, is all subsistence. Uh
IT peoples are there, there's a high rate of
interdependence. Um So they can't do that indefinitely but
women, they certainly are able to leave. Um EVEN
if very often they're brought back, um They also
have more subtle strategies of their ability to withhold
food or cheetah. Again, as I said before, that,
that can really actually have significant impacts on their
husband's social standing. Um They could conceivably also withhold
sex though I have to say, I haven't ever
heard anybody cite that as a strategy that women
used. Um And in part that maybe because there's
definitely a general uh understanding uh among at least
the shore that I've spoken to that, um, sex
is a re record. Women need sex as much
as men do. Um So I've never heard of
women withholding sex, although I'm sure it must happen.
Um AND they can impose costs on their partner.
Uh One strategy that women have available to them.
And I am, unfortunately, I actually know personally one
woman who attempted the strategy is to attempt to
commit suicide. Um This is so the uh um
it's, it's done by consuming Barbas is a AAA
poison that they use for fishing and women will
consume that um, very often when they're out in
their gardens. Uh I mean, I, I don't mean
to make this sound like it happens all the
time. Uh It does not happen all the time,
as I said, um I've, I've known one woman
um very sadly who tried this and she survived
and, and actually their marriage is much improved, which
is kind of a point towards what I'm talking
about. This being a strategy that um usually women
don't actually die from taking this, this drug instead.
Usually somebody finds them uh and forces them to
vomit. Um But what it does is it calls
public attention to the way that their partner is
treating them. Um And this can actually end up
exerting some uh social pressure on the husband, especially
if it gets her family involved. Um And uh
uh that can is another strategy that women have
to subvert some of these things. So especially again,
if a woman has been married against her will
to a man who she does not want to
be with, who is abusive or harmful. This is
the strategies that she has. Um And of course,
also, uh women have recourse to traditional medicines and
witchcraft is practiced amongst the shoar. Um They can
go to shamans um And uh have a variety
of, of um strategies through by which they can
basically exert their own preferences.
So, uh I, I mean, a lot we could
talk about there. But uh let me ask you
this. So uh of course, we're talking about the
Schwar and I would imagine that across many other
human societies, we would see also this interplay between
female choice and parental choice playing out. Uh So,
in terms of, uh and now I'm talking more
generally in terms of evolutionary theory and all of
that. So uh do we know what are the
relative influences of female choice and parental choice on
the evolution of human made references?
Well, so this is where, first of all, I
would say again, we really need to put parental
choice in context of it being very much a
derived trait and it's really we're talking about two
derived traits and by derived, I mean, this is
something new in our lineage. Um And the two
traits that are derived is both parental interest, their
parental preferences for the mating partners of their offspring.
So that's something that presumably arose in the human
evolutionary history after we split from uh our last
common ancestor with the great apes um and parental
influence. And we have to think of that again
as a an adaptive strategy because it costs something
to exert influence, right? So if parents are doing
that, they're incurring some costs in doing that. So
those are the two derived traits. But as I
said, you know, we need to put that in
the larger evolutionary context and ancestral prehuman populations or
early human populations probably actually underwent similar selection pressures
as is typical of most extant primate species, which
is characterized more by, first of all, substantially higher
obligate investment, parental investment by females than males. Um
AND therefore probably across most of human e or
prehuman evolutionary history. We would have seen stronger selection
by and for female preferences for mates and compared
to male preferences, and there would have been no
parental preferences, right? That wouldn't have even been a
force um and stronger selection by and for male
intersexual competition, direct competition, especially physical competition um over
mating opportunities compared to female intersexual competition. So up
until we get to, you know, pretty recent evolutionary
history, we're looking at probably a very, very strong
effect of female choice on it in terms of
a selective pressure um on the species. Now, then
we think about how the mating context of humans
changed and there's a lot of unknowns, right? We
don't know exactly what the typical reproductive context was,
but we're pretty sure that it relied on co-operative
breeding to some extent. Right now, co-operative breeding doesn't
necessarily mean that it has to be the two
biological parents that are investing. But it does mean
that we require as a species, we require some
degree of co-operative investment in offspring. So within that
context, we actually are gonna start to see two
different things. We're gonna start to see both an
increase for selection for male preferences for mates, right?
So males are gonna start to become more and
more selective about their partners as they're investing more
in their partners and offspring. Um AND parental preferences.
Um SH should start to be favored by natural
selection, the expression of having preferences and be will
being willing to incur costs to try to achieve
those preferences. So, you know, so this idea of
which one's more influential. I, yeah, I don't know,
it depends on what time scale we're looking at
and which adaptations we're looking at. What I think
is more interesting and more relevant than, than sort
of this question of, you know, what's the balance
of female choice to parental choice in terms of
what we see is to really what we need
to do is we need to identify the specific
traits that are under selection, the, whether those are
preferences or phenotypic features or behavioral features. Um And
what would have been the influence on those of
individual mate preferences versus third party made preferences is
really the way to think about it, right? Is
even, you know, because, because we know that too,
it's, it's not just parents right, extended can, can,
can have uh an interest in some populations, the
community as a whole has an interest. So, I
mean, it's really this idea of third party mate
preferences and then we can start to think about
what I think is the really interesting part is
to think about what are the contexts in which
we should expect to see more overlap, more, it,
it it um concordance of interests, right? Versus where
we more likely to see more conflict of interest.
And then we can start to make predictions about
in what context, if there's conflict of interest in
what contexts might we expect parental preferences to win
out? And in what context might we expect offspring
preferences to win out? And I, I think the
way that we need to do that is we
need to really think about um excuse me, the
uh the relative costs and benefits to the different
actors in these situations. So in general, I tend
to think of it as fathers and daughters though,
again, it can be mothers and sons as well.
Um But uh I I if we think about
um what are the the factors that are going
to influence the cost benefit ratio to fathers? It's
things like, what is the value of acquiring their
own social connections or mating opportunities? What is the
value of acquiring social connections or mating opportunities for
others including maybe there's their other offspring or siblings?
Um What is the value or the cost of
exerting effort to impose their will over others? So
how easy is it, how hard is it, what
are the features that make it easy or hard
that cost is gonna be a deciding factor? Um
What is the costs that they're likely to incur
from overriding their daughters preferences? Right. So again, in
terms of if daughters in a bad mateship that's
gonna have some effect on, on dad's reproductive, dad's
fitness as well. So, what's that cost? Um And
then here's the thing that I think is one
of the thing that has me most excited. What
I'm really interested in is looking at the gap
in social competence or social knowledge between parents and
offspring. So that also is going to impact if
parents and offspring have pretty much the same information,
they can come to the same conclusion about mates
for their offspring, then that's going to sort of
increase the potential benefits. Uh uh OR, or I'm
sorry, decrease the potential benefits of dad making the
decision and increase the potential costs. Um Whereas if
there's a big gap in this, so parents have
better information or are more uh able to evaluate
potential mates on a variety of factors in terms
of long term reliability or investment prospects or whatever.
Um, THEN it might be a lot more costly
to let daughters have their own preferences. Um And
then the same thing, you know, and thinking about
the payoffs to, to daughters, right, we need to
think about what are the potential benefits to her
being able to fulfill her own mate preferences. And
I think in some environments and in some contexts
that benefit might not be that huge, especially again
if her parents and her interests are aligned, why
fight about it. Um But I think the big
place where that makes a difference is in predictions
of compatibility, right? Because this is the stuff. So
people have been focusing all the people, most of
the people who are writing that parent offspring conflict
inmate choice have been focusing a lot on things
like daughters, daughters should prefer cues to genetic quality
or sexual attractiveness and parents should prefer cues to
resources or net social networks. I think the big
difference between parents and, and daughters is in their
ability to assess compatibility. Um We just don't have
access to the same cues for other people, including
things like scent cues, scent preferences that are we,
we have lots of evidence that both men and
women prefer the scent of people who are, they
are more genetically compatible with. Um We don't have
access to the sent preferences of somebody else, but
also that sort of indefinable thing that we talk
about when we talk about human mating. That click,
right. That chemistry, we still haven't totally figured out
what exactly that is. Probably because it's an incredibly
complicated algorithm taking into account all sorts of information
about shared worldviews, shared values, shared psychology, shared personality,
you know, whatever it is, all of these things
that are weighted in different ways that help us
predict who's somebody I can just be with, I
can get along with that I can work effectively
with. Right. And there, I think it's a really
open question who's better at, at sort of making
those decisions. And I strongly suspect that that's gonna
change dramatically over the lifespan of daughters as they
go from Children to adolescence to young adults, to
adults. Um So that's some of the stuff that
I really want to look at in the future
is looking at this developmental trajectory and where daughters
assessments of potential mates, um when they gain sort
of the the equal uh reliability as their assessments
of their parents. And
and I would imagine that the developmental trajectory would
also include, I mean, unique life experiences, right? Because
I mean, as people try things out with different
mates, they also change their mate preferences I mean,
if women have had bad experiences with these type
of men, then probably as they grow older, they
prefer that type of men. Right.
Right. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Uh, SO, I, I mean, just generally speaking, when
it comes to studying human mate preferences, we've been
focusing here a lot on female mate preferences, but
I would imagine it would be the same for
a male mate preferences. I mean, uh, even if
we come at it, from an evolutionary perspective, we
have to take into account that uh lots of
it as is context dependent, right? I mean, not
only those particular individual life experiences, for example, but
even more generally, it would be influenced by probably
the ecology, the economic circumstances, social influences, peer evaluations,
influences from the family and so on and so
forth. So there is, there's lots of environmental inputs
that go into them.
Right. Right. And that's where I would say that's
actually what the adaptation is. So when we think
about mating adaptations, II, I think it's, you know,
there are a few things that seem to be
fairly catalyzed in humans. So things like preferring sort
of sex, typical body shapes um is, you know,
pretty consistent, but the real adaptation is the the
cognitive work that's being done in terms of taking
in information about the environment. And that's the, as
you said, the ecology, but also the social environment,
it is all of that stuff, right? And this
is where I said, I think, you know, we
are barely barely scratching the surface in understanding all
the the the the crunching of data that our
brains are doing and we experience it as emotion,
right? I like this person. That person makes me
ick. Yeah. You know, that's how we experience it,
but that's like the output of vast amounts of
information, a lot of which we don't even have
conscious access to, right? Like these scent preferences, we're
not even aware of those, but they're strongly influencing
our preferences. And I think this is the thing
that when we talk about human adaptations, almost all
of them, this is what makes humans so unique,
right? We evolved to be able to live in
the most diverse ecologies imaginable. We live in every
natural ecology on the planet except for like one,
right? We live in incredibly diverse social environments that
are shaped in part by the ecological needs of
various places, but also shaped by tradition and cultural
transmission and cultural evolution. And so our greatest adaptation
is in the behavioral flexibility of being able to
pay attention to the relevant cues across these different
domains. So I study mate preferences, right? But other
people study other kinds of partner choice, co-operative partner,
choice, uh alliances or all sorts of things when
you know, when to be prosocial or antisocial. And
all of those, the the adaptation is not that
in humans that we have some sort of rote
response. It's that we are doing massive calculations of
information and then producing on average pretty good responses.
Yeah. Yeah. No, ju just before we move on
to another topic, let me just say that that's
one of the reasons why sometimes II, I mean,
I'm getting increasingly frustrated by people who talk about
innate mate preferences because, I mean, it's like all,
all men and all women everywhere every time pre
tend to prefer this kind of partner. I mean,
really,
really that it's all about the level of abstraction,
the level of generalization, right? So some things like
we can say, for example, we should expect that
women should place a lot of emphasis on cues
to, are they going to have enough resources to
raise offspring? That's a pretty general level of, of,
you know, talking about a specific adaptation because what
those resources are can vary enormously, they might be
physical resources, they might be nutritional resources, they might
be social resources, you know, there's all sorts of
things, it doesn't necessarily need to be from the
dead, you know, anyway. Yeah, it's um there's very
little that I would say is, is, you know,
innate,
right? So let's talk a little bit about paternal
investment then. So what do we know about paternal
investment in humans? How has it evolved and what
are basically the roles that fathers play?
Well, it depends on who you ask, but in
general, um as I've said, several times, I think,
you know, the thing that we can, most of
us probably agree on is that humans require human
offspring, human infants and Children require enormous amounts of
investment. Um, THEY are not able to nutritionally sustain
themselves. Although we're learning more and more about how
much Children are doing with foraging and how much
they're contributing. They're still, they're not able to sustain
themselves as a general rule until mid to late
teens. Um So they're dependent on somebody else provisioning
to some extent, we have general because we have
a really shortened inter birth interval, right? We have
multiple dependent offspring at different developmental stages at once
that we have to invest in. So cooper breeding
in, in that true sense of cooper investment in
offspring has to be part of human mating strategies.
Now, in terms of paternal investment again, as we
just talked about, right. There's a lot of factors
that go into it and it can vary enormously
based on the context if we wanna sort of
make a broad argument about what has been favored
by natural selection in terms of men's attitudes or
interests. Clearly, there has been selection on human males
to like kids more than, you know, males of
most other species, maybe not as much as females,
but more than most other males um to tolerate
kids, to be particularly sensitive to cues of paternity.
Right? So we we there's some evidence that suggests
that men are much more their, their affection for
Children is more contingent on cues to similarity to
themselves, cues to potential paternity. Whereas women's is not.
Um So there's lots of evidence that there has
been selection for paternal investment and this evidence can
runs the gamut from hormonal studies that show for
example, that men's levels of testosterone drop after they
have Children, all sorts of uh different kinds of
evidence suggesting that there's definitely been selection on men
to care about kids to be involved with kids.
Um But as you said, there's not, there's not
one solution. So one of my favorite examples, cultural
examples, ethnographic examples to talk about is uh the
moo uh in China. Uh AND these are in
the highlands near Tibet. Um This population is, has
been there for thousands of years. Um AND they
practice what is referred to as walking marriage. So
it is a socio-economic household reproductive system that is
really different from what we see in most human
populations in particular because Children are raised by their
mothers and their uncles. So the brothers and sisters
are cooperating to raise their offspring, the sisters, offspring
and the fathers of those offspring are cooperating with
their sisters to raise their offspring. Um But there's
a few things that I think are really, really
important to know about relationships and paternal investment in
among the most. So so early ethnographic descriptions suggested
that this was in fact the title of, of
one of the ethnographic books was the, uh, what
was it? Culture without fathers, um, or hus culture
without fathers or husbands, I think is the title.
Um, AND the implication was that people didn't even
know who their biological fathers were, that this relationship
was completely devoid of any importance. But even in
that ethnography and certainly in other accounts, it's clear
that there's a lot of variation. It, some people
absolutely know who their fathers are. Some fathers are
sort of involved in their kids' lives, but their
primary responsibility is still to helping their sisters raise
their Children. Um, THERE'S very strong cultural norms among
the most so to not feel jealousy, to not
form, be proprietary over your partner. Right. Um, AND
yet we, most people form relatively exclusive, relatively long
lasting relationships now, relatively is doing a lot of
work there. Um But what I mean by that
is that we're not really seeing that everybody is
just having sex with different people every night. Right.
And never having relationships. It rather men will say
that they've had four or five walking marriages in
their lives. Right. I mean, that sounds pretty much
like dating and relationships in the US too. Um,
SO, so there's a lot of evidence both in
terms of men's psychology, um, and behaviors, their physiology,
um, and the uh the outcomes of offspring in
various different, um ethnographic contexts when they don't have
fathers around, that leads us to believe that paternal
investment has definitely been a large part of human
evolutionary history. But again, the thing to keep in
mind is that it doesn't have to be just
in this sort of European traditional conjugal pair format.
Right? When we talk about paternal investment, there's all
sorts of ways that men are investing in offspring.
Um Yeah.
Yeah. And I guess we also have to keep
in mind that what we mean by father. Uh
I mean, it's a little bit different across different
societies because for example, I remember reading ethnography on,
I think it was probably some people in, in
the Pacific Island where uh they were mostly a
fishing society. And so the men would go out
for months uh for fishing. And so the kind
of arrangement they had there was that some of
the men did that and others stayed home. And
so for example, if the biological father was away,
it was the responsibility of his brother to take
care of his, of his brother's Children. So, and
that, and so the uncle would be considered the
father as well.
Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and going back to them
so that I was just talking about their um
traditionally and of course, the world is always changing.
But traditionally, the main subsistence activities that men engaged
in were fishing, which often was overnight or multiple
nights on the lake. Um LONG distance yak herding
um which could take men away for a week
to several weeks or um uh uh caravans of
trade, trade goods on this trade caravan that would
take men away for up to a year. And
so, you know, one of the things that to
me is really interesting is that we see here's
a, a scenario, here's a context in which it
would be really difficult to ensure paternity. Right. And
so what has developed over thousands of years, get
rid of how important paternity is, right? So it
doesn't matter if those kids are actually your kids
or not because you're taking care of your sister's
kids. Um And we're pretty sure that they're related
to you because if we calculate, you know, relatedness
to the female line, it's usually pretty, pretty obvious
it came out of her body, it's her kid.
Yeah. So I, I mean, of course, this view
that we have in the west of the nuclear
family. Uh I mean, I've already talked with many
other anthropologists on the show about that and it's
not universal at all but is uh no, not
at all, but is coupling important in human societies.
Yeah. So coupling. And so this is, it was
I was so when you had those questions on
there because I'm like, oh wow, the coupling paper
that's going back to like 2005. Um And, and
although I totally stand by, but here's, here's the
main thing is I probably wouldn't use the term
coupling anymore. Um That was uh it was, it
was just a weird term. I don't even know
why we use that term. Um
Actually I kind of like it. I don't know
why. But
anyway, well, the reason I don't like it is
because everybody thinks we're talking about like cop population,
right? Which is not what we mean. Um So,
but also that, that paper was a commentary on
a target article that was about the cult of
single or cult of no cult of couple in,
especially in the U I US and Canada. Oh
my gosh, this is so long ago. Um And
so the, the target article was pointing out really
all the injustices and inequities in the way societies
very much aimed it. And again, society being American
and Canadian, I think was their their target. Um
BUT very much about that family unit, right? And
so we wrote this paper, the evolution of coupling
in response to that. And one of the things
that we were arguing is that we should expect
that forming emotional bonds is that should be a
human universal that we, that we have the capacity
to do this. So when I say human universal
also, I don't mean everybody does it to the
same extent or it's, you know, like this innate
sort of, you know, now I own to you,
right? It's there's still massive amounts of individual variation.
But definitely if we compare humans to our closest
primate relatives, right? We are more likely we tend
to form these emotional attachments. And one of the,
you know, I, so my background was very much
in the humanities. Um BEFORE I got into evolutionary
anthropology and I was taught like many other people
in my liberal arts education that romantic love was
something that was basically invented uh in western courts
in the middle ages. Um And that it wasn't,
you know, like a, a true human emotion. And
I kind of bought that when I was an
undergraduate. Many, many, many, many, many, many moons ago.
Um um BECAUSE we, if we look at cultural
practices, we see so much variation in terms of
things like how we structure our families, what's considered
acceptable expressions of love, whether or not love is
even a factor in marriage, right? So we have
all sorts of variation with some societies being marriages
like the and this is what that target article
was about that the romantic partners, the end all
be all. It's like every relationship that we could
possibly need our best friend and our lover and
our uh I don't remember what all else they
are, co parent or, you know, all of it.
And what we responded is we said, look, there's
nothing in evolutionary theory that says that that one
relationship has to be all those things. What we
see in evolutionary theory is that we should be
looking for all of those things. We are looking
for romantic relation. Connections, we are looking for physical
connections, we are looking for co-operative connections, we are
looking for all of these things, but we're supremely
flexible in how we compile those. And so it's
true that in, you know, the Western European tradition,
we sort of put all of that onto the
conjugal pair. Um But in other societies, we see
people taking different pieces of that from different different
relationships. Um So coupling, is it important? Yes and
no, it depends on how you're defining it, right?
When I define it, when I talk about coupling,
I'm talking about seeking somebody with whom. And this
is what the the the studies that looked for
evidence of romantic love cross culturally, some of the
ways that they identified it is seeking AAA semi
exclusive or a largely exclusive. Uh um What's the
word I'm looking for connection with somebody else, an
intimate connection with somebody else feeling um an intense
desire for reciprocal emotion from that person rearranging one's
priorities for that person. So that is what we're
talking about in terms of romantic love, in terms
of coupling. Here's the thing that I think is
so cool about it. That doesn't have to be
with the biological parent of your offspring. Doesn't need
to be with somebody of the opposite sex. Doesn't
need to be with somebody of reproductive. Yeah, it,
it can be anybody, it could be, you could
form that kind of bond with any anybody. And
in different. And again, part of the environment is
the social environment. So we might be more likely
to form it with different people in different contexts.
But as a species, we are able to form
those kinds of cooper bonds across an incredibly diverse
array of different kinds of relationships. Um So coupling,
it's important in terms of finding those co-operative partners,
in terms of assessing it. You know, I, I
talked to my undergrads about the gossip columnists, you
know, the Hollywood gossip columnists and it's like, it
seems stupid right, that we should care about the
sex lives of people that we don't know and
are never gonna meet. But we're people as, you
know, as a general rule, we're obsessed. Um, I
speak very broadly that way, not you or me,
you know, but we as humans, we, we tend
to be obsessed with this. Um, AND there's reasons
why we should be very attuned to the mateship
of others is that person in some sort of,
especially if it's a, a sexual relationship because we
have both potential mates for ourselves and potential competitors,
either competitors for the same mate we want or
competitors trying to maybe take away our mate. Um
And so we're, we are, we're like, really obsessed
with information cues to, is this person already in
a partnership? Are they a threat to me? Are
they a potential benefit to me, all of those
kinds of things? Um, BUT definitely there is not
a one size fits all. So if we say
that, yeah, humans have adaptations to form co-operative romantic
relationships. That is, you know, in no way saying
that, oh yes, humans evolved to have uh nuclear
families with one father, one mother and 2.5 Children.
Um, THAT'S just, that's not the conclusion.
No. And the, that bit about, uh, there's not,
no one size that fits all is very interesting
because I, I mean, I, I also get very
bothered when, for example, people start discussing and by
people, I even mean, academics sometimes start discussing mating
systems in humans because then, uh, I mean, a
and sometimes it's very obvious that, uh, people who
put for certain arguments is just because they themselves
tend to prefer a particular mating system like, oh,
I'm polyamory. Oh, I'm monogamous. And then here's the
evidence for humans being monogamous, here's the evidence for
humans being polyamory. And I'm, and I'm just like,
look, just get, just get over it, do whatever
you want. And, but then, I mean, it doesn't
make any sense for me at least to say
that humans have evolved as a monogamous species or
poly amorous species or a polygynous species because it
depends again on ecology, on economy on, I mean,
individual preferences or, I mean, why are people so
obsessed with
it? It really is. Yeah. No, it really is
funny and it's, it's, you know, people are, they
like, and I remember this again, going, you know,
again, going back, way to the dark ages of
when I was an undergraduate. Um, I remember sort
of being like, yeah, man, you know, fight, fight
the fight the system. Humans really weren't designed to
be monogamous. Um, REALLY it turns out, you know,
I mean, so here's how I would put it,
say humans are designed to be much more monogamous
than almost any other mammal. Um Really, I mean,
you know, and we're designed to be much more
likely to form long term bonds and have paternal
investment in those offspring than almost any other mammals.
Um But no, you can't say that that humans
are, you know, evolved to be monogamous or polygamous
or poly and whatever poly amorous. Iii I don't,
I hate, I shouldn't say that I hate the
term poly amorous and I, I hate it only
because I, I feel like we already had that
term. Um WHICH is polygamy. I don't anyway, it
doesn't matter. Um It's, it's after 2 a.m. here.
So I'm, I'm starting to, you know, get a
little punchy. Um But uh to get back to
that one of the things. So I tell my,
my students, so I'm teaching this and my anthropology
of sex and gender class and I do teach
them, you know, the, the primary mating system, I
got four primary mating systems, polygamy, polyandry, polygynandry, um
multi male, multi female and monogamy, right? And, and
I tell them that, you know, if we look
across humans, certainly there's evidence of pair bonding. We've
got tons of evidence of pair bonding, including things
like reduced sexual dimorphism. Um You know, all all
sorts of things that suggest that we definitely have
an evolutionary history of para bonding. We also definitely
have lots of evidence of an evolutionary history of
sperm competition, right? That it certainly we do not
have any clear evidence of an evolutionary history of
strict monogamy, certainly not strict sexual monogamy. Um We
in terms of polyandry, right? We basically look like
all other species, which is that the populations where
we see polyandry, except in humans, we're all humans,
right? Most other species, we see these variations at
the species level. But where we see polyandry, it's
usually because the resources are really scarce and there's
not, there's not enough for one woman plus one
partner to raise offspring. So, what do we see?
We see men partnering up and almost always, no
more than two and almost always brothers, right? This
is the same thing that we see in poly
polyandrous, nonhuman species. Um
And that's mostly because of paternity, uncertainty.
Right. Exactly. It's like, so, so what males are
doing any sexually reproducing males, if they're sharing a
female partner, they're basically cutting the reproductive potential in
half. And this is particularly true of mammals because
again, in mammals, they're really, you know, there's, I
know, again, people are, are revisiting these ideas of
obligate parental investment. But I'm like, come on, in
mammals, there's at least a baseline, really big difference.
Um, IN humans, it's definitely, I'm like, all bets
are off because even defining what obligate parental investment
is, is, is nearly impossible. Right? I mean, is
it, should we consider it obligate to get the
appropriate social inputs? I mean, I think so because
Children don't develop normally if they don't have that.
So, you know, I mean, there's anyway, just even
defining what obligate parental investment is in humans is
difficult and then what, you know, men can provide
and what women can provide. But most of it
past lactation is not at all female specific, right?
And again, our Children are dependent until their mid
to late teens. So clearly, males have plenty of
opportunity to be incredibly important uh in investing in
offspring. But the only, the only mating system and
this goes back to the polyamory thing. The only
mating system that we have really no evidence that
humans have ever been any good at is polygynandry.
Uh MULTI male, multi mating um mating systems. We're
terrible at it. We keep trying to do it.
People really want to do it every generation. There's
like, you know, a new invention of free love
societies or, you know, poly amorous societies, whatever people
love the idea of it and they keep trying
to make it happen, but they all fail. Um
They, they don't persist and they don't persist because
even though we love the idea of being able
to have as many mates as we want and
the ones that we want, we really don't like
the idea of our partners being able to do
that and frankly, males even more so than females.
Right. So, these poly amorous today, it's poly amorous
in the seventies. In the sixties it was free.
Love communes, right. Um, THEY, they fall apart. They,
they, you know, almost always fall apart pretty quickly.
Um And it's usually due to jealousy. Um And,
and again, that's evidence that we do have adaptations
to form attachments to form these sorts of pair
bonds. Um Again, no particular way. There's massive amounts
of latitude in what that looks like and what
it, how it's expressed, but we definitely have adaptations
to form feelings of. I want this person for
me.
Yeah. A a and I mean, since I score
very low on agreeableness, I know that you want
to be a little bit more diplomatic here when
it comes to polyamory. But uh I'm going to
say it straight out. I, I mean, just cut
the BS because it basically always falls back on
polygyny.
Yeah. Yeah. No, absolutely. Um Yeah, men, men, men
do not like to share their women. So,
so, yeah, le let's leave it at that. But
I, I also don't want to
be
polyamory people too much. But
anyway, well, and here's the thing too is I
would say, you know, what if you're into polyamory?
Great. That's great. Go for live your best life.
Um, I, you know, I just did it. I,
I don't, I'm not optimistic. It will last as
long as you think it might.
Yeah, me, me neither.
And,
and anyway, I, I don't want to make you
stay up until 3 a.m. because here in Portugal
it's the morning. So, uh, not a problem at
all for me. But a anyway, let's get just
into one last topic and going all the way
back to one of the first points we talked
about when we were talking about the sure and
gender roles. Uh How do you approach sex and
gender as an anthropologist and also from an evolutionary
perspective.
So, first of all, uh you know, in my,
in my head, um those two things, I, I
really, to me it's the, the, the tri triumvirate
of sex, gender and sexuality and they're all associated
with one another, but they're not the same thing.
So, and they're important for different things and in
different contexts. Um A lot of which were just
barely beginning to really untangle. So sex is a
real biological thing. Um The, you know, that are
there only two, no, there's definitely more than two.
Although the vast majority of humans fall into one
of two primary sexes, 90 more than 99%. Um
And how do we, how am I defining the
sexes? I'm defining that in really biological terms, which
is, you know, uh uh the chromosome chromosomes is
the most basic. But you can also look at
um e external indicators of chromosomes which are genitalia,
which of course, there's not a perfect 1 to
1 association. But again, there's a very, very, very
strong correlation um in more than 90% of humans,
what you see on the outside when they're born
matches what their chromosomes are not all people. Right.
So again, absolutely. People that don't have XX or
XY are real people. They exist, you know, they
are real people and they are part of the
human variation. Um But it is also true that
the vast majority have either XX or XY and
uh uh
sorry to interrupt. But also people who have XX
or XY but do not develop the corresponding uh
secondary sexual characteristics and might identify as the opposite
gender, for example.
Absolutely. So, and again, I would say that there's,
there's still a couple of different things there. So
you're talking about first, the, the developmental cor physical
developmental correlates of chromosomal sex. So secondary sexual characteristics
and we again is really clear, it's really obvious
that humans are sexually dimorphic. We're only mildly sexually
dimorphic in size. But, you know, it's, it's a
very simple thought experiment. I tell, you know, again,
I tell this to my students, I'm like, imagine
a bunch of babies, male and female babies just
wearing diapers um, and no adornments, no hair. No,
nothing. Right. Just diapers. So you're just covering their
genitals. You know, could you sort them into male
and female and some of them think they could.
But I'm like, I'm here to tell you you
couldn't, you know, you would, you would be at
chance, um, sorting infants that have their genitals covered.
However, if you think about adults, adult humans wearing
just something to cover their genitals and again, remember
genitals is just the lower part. Um EVEN if
we remove all other extraneous stuff, hair, right? Make
up any of those kinds of things, any of
the cultural indicators of sex, you would have like
a 90% success rate in identifying males versus females
at least, right? Um So humans are definitely sexually
dimorphic and again, those dimorphic body shapes largely correlate
with the chromosomes. Ok. So that's two parts. So
far we've got, you know, the internal biology and
chemistry and we've got the external phenotypic traits. Now,
the part that I think gets into gender is
the expression of maleness and femaleness and this is
where it starts getting really super messy. Um IN
part because here there, it's not categorical at all.
So sex, I would argue is fundamentally fundamentally categorical.
Is it binary? No, there's definitely more than two,
but it's definitely still fundamentally categorical. Um WHEREAS gender
is fundamentally continuous, it is, there is no masculine
and feminine. There's ranges around masculine and feminine and
there's, oh, sorry, go ahead.
Let me just ask you this just to see
if you would agree with this point or not.
But, uh, I mean, of course, across societies, there's
many different ways of expressing, uh, gender binary. I
mean, what it means to be a woman or
a man across different societies in terms of how
they dress, how they present, how they behave and
so on. I mean, it varies. But uh e
even if we have uh uh a general binary
across societies, I mean, in the, if it, and
even if it's different from sex, that uh whatever
it is that a man or a woman means
in the society you live in, it's still the
case that there's a very high degree of correlation
between your sex and you white and defining as
a man or a woman and behaving and presenting
as a man or a woman according to the
norms in the society.
So again, there's, there's actually multiple different levels to
be thinking about that because there are some gender
traits that really do appear to be pretty consistent
across cultures and across time. Um So for example,
we show homicide data which is really dark one
to show. But you know, if we look at
homicide data across cultures, cross continents. Historically, we see
what looks like exactly the same pattern in the
data again and again and again, which is this
big spike in homicide Commission. Um HOMICIDE commission by
males uh in the late teens, early twenties that
then drops back off and it's massively higher than
any point. The the female commission of, of homicide,
what differs. And this is why, you know, again,
I love these data because it shows so clearly
that culture definitely matters because the overall rates vary
enormously. Right. You can look at, oh God, I'm
gonna pull this from my, my memory and I'm,
I, I actually have Dyscalculia which means I'm not
good with numbers at all. I can't keep them
straight. I'm gonna try and do it. And this
is from memory. So we'll see how I do.
And it was like the comparison of the Canadian
data to the Chicago data and the big difference
was the overall homicide rate in Canada. It was
something like it maxed out at something like 30
something I wanna say per million per year. Maybe
it was a little more than that. I wanna
say it was in 30 something and in Chicago
it was like 1000 or 3000, you know, something
in the thousands per million per year. So culture
matters, right? Massively different rates of homicide. But the
magnitude of difference between men and women was the
same, the age pattern was the same, right? And
that's, you know, again and again and again and
again, small scale societies, large scale societies, you know,
all over the place, same pattern. So some things
that, that we would consider gender do appear to
be related to maleness and femaleness. And those are
likely to be those things that would have been
really differentially important to male or female reproductive success
on average over evolutionary history. Right? So there's, it's
not, it's not an accident that males are more
likely to commit homicide. It's because over evolutionary history,
the context of male competition for reproductive success would
have favored much more uh direct physical strategies, um
competitive strategies. Um So, so we do see some
of these universals at some level of generality. But
then as you said, there's other things that are
like, there's just no pattern at all. Right. So
whether I whether we wear clothing on the bottom
half that has one opening for both our legs
or one leg and opening for each leg, right.
So skirts or pants, um there's, there's, you know,
there's no predicting who's gonna wear what, in what
society, it's all over the place. In some places,
both men and women wear clothes that have an
opening for each leg and some, they both wear
clothes that have only one opening for both legs.
I mean, even just in western society just look
at paintings of men from the 18th century.
Right. Right. And even things like, you know, some
of the things that we might think of as
really like masculine, feminine, like being emotionally expressive. Yeah,
actually, that turns out to be a lot more
variable Right. It's not nearly as clear as something
like the, the homicide data. Um, SO there's a
lot of things that are much more culturally defined
but as you said, what's interesting about and, and,
and, and what's interesting also when we look into,
look at societies that recognize additional, like, uh, uh,
additional sexes or genders. Right. So, um, they used
to be, we used to call them third sex.
Uh, uh, um, OH my God. See, here it
is. It's so late. I can't, my words are
just like gone. We used to talk about them
as um size that, that uh recognized third sexes.
It's even more complicated than that, right? But if
I could summarize as cultures in which there is
recognized more than two sexes. Um And there's a
lot of them, right? There's a lot of examples
of this. So
an example of that be the fafa f in
Samoa.
Yep. Absolutely. The Affine, the, uh the Hira in
India, the moche in Mexico. Um There's like I
said, there's lots of examples, two spirit people, which
is the, the term that's sort of, of course,
that one's really confusing because it's a term that's
used across Native American nationalities, but it means different
things in different contexts. Anyway, we'll leave that one
aside. So even in cultures where they very clearly
recognize third or more sexes or genders, they still
very clearly recognize men and women as well. Right.
So there's no place that I know of, um,
where there's no concept of men and women and,
and also they still make a distinction between female
traits and male traits because even if they're talking
about feminine men or masculine women or two spirited
people, I mean, they're still recognizing that they have
more fe or male traits, more female traits are
a mix of both.
Right. Right. Right. Exactly. So, it's like, inherent in
recognizing the diversity of gender expression is understanding the
patterns of gender expression, right? If there weren't patterns,
none of that would be anything we talk about.
Right. Um So yeah, so there's definitely, you know,
and even when I talk about in anthropology, we
talk about the gender division of labor or the
sexual division of labor. And one of the things
that I try to impart to my students is
that the existence of a sexual division of labor
is absolutely universal. It exists in every human society
that we have any record of. But what varies
is the extent of the sexual division of labor.
So, for example, in some societies, absolutely everything is
gendered, right? Um Women's lives are comprised of this
stuff and men's lives of this stuff and never
the Twain shall meet in other societies. Almost everything
is not gendered, but there might be a couple
of things, right? Like this is really considered something
that women do and this is really something that's
considered that men do. Um So that can vary.
The, the uh strictness of the division of labor,
the sexual division of labor can vary. So, in
some places it's like, you know, incredibly bad if
you do something that's outside of your gender professions,
in other places, it's, you know, it's like uh
yeah, usually men do that but you're a woman
and you're doing it. So it's not that big
of a deal. Um So that varies and uh
one other thing, so I saw the, the ubiquity
of them. Um, OH, and the importance there is
one other thing that I usually identify. Um, BUT
anyway, so there is a sexual division of labor
everywhere which again is a recognition of gendered activities.
But, oh, and the content of them, that was
the thing. That was the third thing, the content
of them. So, you know, in some places, basket
making is men's work, in some places, basket making
is women's work. Um There are a, so if
you look at, uh, Bobby Lowe, um, has, uh,
identified, um, a number of activities that are almost
universally, uh, male dominated. Um And there are very
few that are almost universally female dominated outside of
child care. Um But there are several that seem
to be almost universally dominated by men, um, that
include things like large game hunting, um, and, uh,
metal working, I think was one of them. Uh,
AND,
and
also,
uh, I mean, let me just ask you this,
uh, unless I'm mistaken. But I guess that we
can also say that even the sexual division of
labor is not completely uh inflexible, right? Because for
example, uh there are certain activities like just in
the West, uh up till the Second World War,
it was common for uh for people to think
that working in factories was mostly a male job.
But then due to the lack of males after
the Second World War, there were lots and lots
and lots of women working in factories and that
was considered perfectly normal. And I mean, many other
activities that since the emancipation of women in the
seventies opened up to women participation. And now we
just think it's perfectly normal for women to be
doctors and so on.
Right. No, and that's exactly the point, right? That,
that flexibility that, that both it can vary between
cultures, but also it varies over time. Um And
so yeah, it's not at all static. It's not
that, you know, yes, women do this and men
do that and it, it never changes. Um It
can change a lot, it can change frequently, can
change very quickly. One of the things that is
really interesting and we can see this very easily
in our own uh culture and history is that
very often tasks which are considered women's work as
soon as they become profitable or high status, become
men's work. Um So I'm not kidding though. Right.
You were laughing. II I wasn't laughing because I
thought you were kid. It was just that,
I know it is. It's funny and it's so
obvious. Right. So we look at, you know, here
in the USA generation ago, right. Elementary school teachers
were women, college professors were men. Right. Waitresses were
women made ds were men, seamstresses were women, clothing,
designers were men. Right? I mean, it's like we
see it again and again and again, who takes
care of six people in the home, women who
gets paid big bucks to be a doctor, men.
So,
and, and also, I mean, even the idea of
the traditional idea that women cook, I mean, now
you have very famous male chefs, but why? Because
it pays a lot to be a famous
chef? And do you know how hard it is
for women to break into that really high end
chef career? It's like the women are incredibly underrepresented.
It's, you know, and again, it's one of those
things, it's like, it's, it's almost stunning in its
obviousness
you think you would like to have?
Uh um, DID you just ask me anything? I'd
like to add?
I mean,
what I could talk all night, right?
I mean, we can, we can also schedule a
second interview to talk just about the anthropology of
sex and gender. I mean, I would
love, no, it is, it's, it's a fascinating topic
and I think, you know, and I think that
we're really at an interesting time where we starting
to recognize so much more that sex and gender
are likely having different effects on different things. And
I think we're at a, you know, at a
time in history where we really have to revisit
when and why knowing somebody's sex matters. I would
argue that it definitely does for a lot of
things, primarily health related things, right? All of our
cells, every single one of our cells is a,
has a sex has, you know, because it has
our sex chromosomes, xxxy or some other variant, right?
Every single one of
our, I guess that even socially, I mean, we
have to understand that it matters for people to
really be able to distinguish between men and women
because since we are a sexually reproducing species, I,
I mean, you want to be attracted to, uh,
whoever you are attracted to.
Right. Right. Well, in addition to that, you know,
one of the things and i, it's funny because
no, people don't like to answer this question very
honestly. But I ask my students, I say, you
know, if you are walking back to your car
across campus late at night, all alone. Right. And
you hear somebody walking behind you, do you care
if it's a man or a woman? And everybody
wants to say no, no, no, I don't care.
I don't care. And I'm like, really, really, you
don't care. You, you should care, you should care
because here's the thing, even though if it's a
man, there's almost no chance that he's gonna do
anything. So he's probably also just trying to get
back to his car and go home. Right. But
it's a much higher chance that you're gonna have
some sort of antagonistic interaction with a man than
with a woman. Right? So, even leaving, you know,
finding a mate aside, you should care whether you're
a man or a woman, right? On average men
pose greater risks. Now again, does that mean that
women are all nice and sweet? No, of course
not. Does it mean that women can't mug you?
They can, they don't do it as often. Um
You know, uh does it mean that most men
are gonna mug you? No, of course not. Most
men are totally not gonna do anything to you.
But on average over evolutionary history, knowing somebody's sex
gave you a lot of information about what kind
of interaction you might have. So, you know, I'm
not at all ready to throw out the sex
baby with the bathwater. I don't know how that
goes. But, but I do think that there's also
a lot of things that, you know, I think
more and more we're saying, oh, this thing, whatever
it is, whether it's uh you know, worldview or
parenting approaches, um maybe more related to gender, to
our gender, our expression of gender than to our
sex. And it may be more profitable, profitable in
the terms of, in terms of being able to
predict and a, uh you know, address problems in
the world um that to assess people's gender rather
than their sex for some things. Um But I
just don't think we're there yet. I think that,
you know, we're just starting to really look at
that. Yy, you know, it's actually very recent and,
and it's still not done all the time that
we even look at a lot of data by
sex right across the biological sciences very often. We
still don't even differentiate by sex. Um So we're
only catching up to that to be like, well,
maybe sex matters and now I think what we
need to do is add in on top of
it like I don't think we should get rid
of sex, but I think we should be asking
about sex and gender and I think we're gonna
find that there are some things that sex matters
for and some things that gender matters for.
Oh, ok. So look, I don't want to torture
you more because I know it's almost three
A
ma
a
and we really have to wrap this up and
uh, I, I mean, we have to schedule another
conversation just about sex and gender because if we
kept going on, we would be here for another
two hours.
I know. I know it's a great topic though.
Oh, yeah, sure. Uh So would you like to
tell people where they can find you and your
work on the internet.
Uh Yes, the easiest way is to just type
pills worth into Google. Um, I am blessed with
a very rare last name. It's true. I, I
mean, I don't know, you should try it there
in Portugal, but usually if you, somebody just types
pills worth into Google, I'm the first one that
comes up. Um, AND I'm related to all the
other ones. Uh, BUT I am at Cal State
Fullerton. It's true where there are very, very few
of us. Um uh AT Cal State Fullerton, I
do have a, a very out of date web
address there. Um Which let me give it to
you. Hold on, I have to look it up.
I
mean, I can look it up myself and put
it in the
right. So you find me there. Um And uh
yeah, and that's it, I guess is as you
can find me at Cal State Fullerton and on,
on Google.
Ok, great. So I'm leaving links to that in
the description of the interview and Dr Pil. Thank
you so much again for coming on the show.
I really, really love the conversation and I hope
to have you back on somewhere in the near
future. Ab
Absolutely. We can do another midnight uh chat. All
right. Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs called Hofi Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J and
Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes Mark
Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan Wilson
Yasa dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte,
Bli Nicole Barba Adam hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale Me,
Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price. Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca
Lati Gilon Cortez Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey
then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson
Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda
Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George Katis Valentine
Steinman, Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali. Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Veg
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all.